Q1) In amoeba, food is digested in the:

(a) Food vacuole

(b) Mitochondria

(c) Pseudopodia

(d) Chloroplast

Correct Answer: Option (a)

Q2) In which of the following groups of organisms are food materials broken down outside the body and absorbed?

(a) Mushroom, green plants, amoeba

(b) Yeast, mushroom, bread mould

(c) Paramecium, amoeba, cuscuta

(d) Cuscuta, lice, tapeworm

Correct Answer: Option (b)
Q3) The contraction and expansion movement of the walls of the food pipe is called:

(a) Translocation

(b) Transpiration

(c) Peristaltic movement

(d) Digestion

Correct Answer: Option (c)
Q4) What are the products obtained by anaerobic respiration in plants?

(a) Lactic acid + energy

(b) Carbon dioxide + water + energy

(c) Ethanol + carbon dioxide + energy

(d) Pyruvate

Correct Answer: Option (c)
Q5) When a few drops of iodine solution are added to rice water, the solution turns blue-black in colour. This indicates that rice water contains:

(a) Fats

(b) Complex proteins

(c) Starch

(d) Simple proteins

Correct Answer: Option (c)
Q7) The respiratory pigment in human beings is:

(a) Carotene

(b) Chlorophyll

(c) Haemoglobin

(d) Mitochondria

Correct Answer: Option (c)
Q8) Which of the following is the important characteristic of Emphysema?

(a) Destruction of the alveolar wall and air sacs in the lungs are damaged

(b) Increase in the growth of the lung tissue

(c) Inflammation in the wall of the bronchi

(d) Thickening of the artery walls of the lungs

Correct Answer: Option (a)
Q9) The characteristic processes observed in anaerobic respiration are:

i) Presence of oxygen

ii) Release of carbon dioxide

iii) Release of energy

iv) Release of lactic acid

(a) i), ii) only

(b) i), ii), iii) only

(c) ii), iii), iv) only

(d) iv) only

Correct Answer: Option (c)
Q10) The opening and closing of the stomatal pore depend upon:

(a) Oxygen

(b) Temperature

(c) Water in the guard cells

(d) Concentration of CO2

Correct Answer: Option (c)
Q11) A plant gets rid of excess water through transpiration. What is the method used by plants to get rid of solid waste products?

(a) Shortening of stem

(b) Dropping down fruits

(c) Shedding of yellow leaves

(d) Expansion of roots into the soil

Correct Answer: Option (c)
Q12) Chemicals present in tobacco smoke lead to the breakdown of the elastic tissue in the alveoli. Name this specific condition.

(a) Heart disease

(b) Emphysema

(c) Bronchitis

(d) Lung cancer

Correct Answer: Option (b)
Q13) Digestion of food starts from which organ of the human digestive system?

(a) Mouth due to the presence of saliva

(b) Oesophagus that moves the food in the gut

(c) Pancreas that releases juices for fat breakdown

(d) Stomach that helps in mixing food with digestive juices

Correct Answer: Option (a)
Q14) What is the percentage of oxygen in the expired air when a person is resting?

(a) 12%

(b) 16%

(c) 20%

(d) 24%

Correct Answer: Option (b)
Q15) How is food transported from the phloem to the tissues according to plants’ needs?

(a) Food is transported along with the water in the plant’s body

(b) Food is transported in only one direction, like water in the plant body through the xylem

(c) Food is transported from a region with a low concentration to a higher concentration

(d) Food is transported from the region where it is produced to other parts of the plants

Correct Answer: Option (d)
Q16) Which of the following is the correct sequence of body parts in the human alimentary canal?

(a) Mouth → stomach → small intestine → large intestine → oesophagus

(b) Mouth → oesophagus → stomach → small intestine → large intestine

(c) Mouth → stomach → oesophagus → small intestine → large intestine

(d) Mouth → oesophagus → stomach → large intestine → small intestine

Correct Answer: Option (b)
17. Which of the following is NOT a life process?

a) Nutrition

b) Respiration

c) Communication

d) Excretion


Answer: c) Communication
18. The process by which green plants make their own food is called:

a) Respiration

b) Photosynthesis

c) Transpiration

d) None of the above


Answer: b) Photosynthesis
19. Which of the following is NOT a raw material required for photosynthesis?

a) Carbon dioxide

b) Water

c) Oxygen

d) Sunlight


Answer: c) Oxygen
20. The process by which cells obtain energy from glucose is called:

a) Respiration

b) Digestion

c) Absorption

d) Circulation


Answer: a) Respiration